[[cls-16-8]]
== Interoperability Levels

The *interoperabilityLevel* attribute (*S100_IC_InteroperabilityCatalogue,
S100_IC_DisplayPlane, S100_IC_PredefinedCombination,*
_*S-100_IC_HybridFeatureCreationRule*_) is used to indicate a level of
interoperability. The value 0 means interoperability is off and all layers
are portrayed according to their stacking order. When a value of 1 or
higher is assigned to the interoperabilityLevel attribute it means the
interoperability functionality is on. The exact meaning of any value of 1
or higher must be described in the Interoperability Catalogue
specification where model is implemented.

Different product combinations may require different types of
interoperability in order to work as intended in a system. For example, a
product combination may require the ability to turn off a feature in
product A to give prominence to a feature in product B. Another example
may be that a product combination requires the ability to place product C
in-between layers within product D. Within the same Interoperability
Catalogue these different types of interoperability can be distinguished
using different values in the *interoperabilityLevel* attribute of the
classes that make up the functions.

[example]
A specification has defined four levels of interoperability in addition to
the so-called Level 0. The four levels start out with simple interleaving
at Level One to virtually combing data at Level Four as seen in the
example <<fig-16-7>> below.

[[fig-16-7]]
.Example of how to separate interoperability functions into levels
image::img197.png[]
