[[cls-16-10]]
== Production process of Interoperability Catalogues

Interoperability Catalogues are created in an XML editor environment. It
is generally expected that any off-the-shelf XML Editor can perform this
task. The creation process of any new versions may benefit from starting
from the previous version when available. Another alternative is to
develop a dedicated Interoperability Catalogue Editor that can create and
maintain Interoperability Catalogues with dedicated functions for creating
the various components, such as display planes and predefined combinations.

Due to the interconnected nature of the Product Specifications that are
under the Interoperability Schema, a form of overarching change management
is a necessity. Any revision or New Edition required in a Product
Specification should be announced well in advance, giving the whole
stakeholder community ample time to review the impact before it goes into
effect. Any revisions and New Editions to a supported Product
Specification may require a new version of an Interoperability Catalogue
and the party responsible for the maintenance of an Interoperability
Catalogue needs to be informed and involved to assess any impacts. This
includes updates to dataset metadata, as metadata changes such as Product
Specification references may impact the link between the dataset and the
Interoperability Catalogue.

It is recommended that Interoperability Catalogues be distributed in an
exchange set structure, see Part 17. Discovery metadata for
Interoperability Catalogues must be provided in XML format conforming to
S-100 dataset discovery as specified in S-100 Part 17, with the extensions
described in this clause.

[[cls-16-10.1]]
=== Management of Feature Catalogue and Portrayal Catalogues updates

Changes to a supported Product Specification may have impacts on an
Interoperability Catalogue. Revisions to the Feature Catalogue or
Portrayal Catalogue are the most likely to require a revision of the
Interoperability Catalogue in order to support the change. These types of
changes will generally require a new version (n.n.0) of the
Interoperability Catalogue to ensure support. It should be noted that
revisions to a supported Feature Catalogue or Portrayal Catalogue may be
ignored by previous versions of an Interoperability Catalogue and it is
therefore necessary to consider this as part of the change management
process, especially if the change is a matter of navigational safety.
Major changes to Product Specifications, such as adding functionality or
adding new Product Specifications to the supported list will result in a
new edition (n.0.0) of an Interoperability Catalogue.

Versions of an Interoperability Catalogue within the same edition are
considered a compatible group. When a New Edition is issued, this
compatibility is broken; and efforts should be undertaken to update all
impacted systems as soon as possible.

[[fig-16-8]]
.Examples of how Feature Catalogue change may impact Interoperability Catalogue lifecycle
image::img198.png[]

Several types of changes to supported Product Specifications may impact an
Interoperability Catalogue in such a way that a new version is needed to
maintain full support. These include:

* New feature added to a supported Product Specification that requires a
new feature combination to be added to an Interoperability Catalogue;
* New attribute added to a feature in a supported Product Specification
that requires a new attribute combination to be added to an
Interoperability Catalogue;
* New Product Specification is added to the list of supported Product
Specifications in an Interoperability Catalogue. This could also require
new feature and attribute combinations to be added;
* Removal of feature or attribute from a supported Product Specification
that are present in a feature or attribute combination within an
Interoperability Catalogue;
* A correction to a supported Product Specification that triggers a
version increment (n.*n*.0), which may break links from an
Interoperability Catalogue to the supported Product Specification;
* Matters of navigational safety as they arise.

Adding new functions in either a supported Product Specification or an
Interoperability Specification may require a new version of an
Interoperability Catalogue.

[[cls-16-10.2]]
=== Product Specification updates other than FC/PC

Updates to dataset metadata, such as Product Specification references, may
impact the link between a dataset and an Interoperability Catalogue and
therefore require a revision to the Interoperability Catalogue (n.*n*.0).
Some changes to an interoperability-ready Product Specification may not
require any changes to an Interoperability Specification or an
Interoperability Catalogue. This includes amendments to the definitions of
features, attributes or attribute values. It also includes minor changes
to Product Specifications, such as clarifying language. Other changes may
only require an update to the metadata of an Interoperability
Specification and/or Interoperability Catalogue, such as in case of
supported Product Specification version references. Such minor changes to
an Interoperability Specification and/or Interoperability Catalogue may be
collected and be applied at a later time when a more substantial revision
is required.

[[cls-16-10.3]]
=== Unpredictable Product Specification updates

Unpredictable changes to an interoperability-ready Product Specification,
or its Feature Catalogues and Portrayal Catalogues, should be avoided.
Great care should be taken in coordinating changes among all stakeholders
to avoid any unforeseen consequences. Product Specifications that are
under the same interoperability umbrella should be considered
interconnected. The responsible groups should therefore coordinate changes
with other groups that issue interoperability-ready Product
Specifications. Such coordination can be done, for example, by having an
agreed fixed period between releases in which all pending changes are
collected, implemented and issued in a coordinated fashion.

NOTE: If a situation arises where a product is not compatible with an
Interoperability Catalogue, this product will only be available as an
overlay that may obscure any data below the incompatible product, or the
overlay may be obscured by any data with higher priority.

[[cls-16-10.4]]
=== Additional data products to be defined in the Catalogue

An Interoperability Catalogue should in theory be extensible to products
not yet defined, provided these are within the same S-100 Edition. New
products can be included in a Catalogue, but such scenarios will require a
New Edition of an Interoperability Catalogue. The default processing for
any Interoperability Catalogue is that any new product follows the default
rule of being used as an overlay, generally stacked in a user defined
order and with default viewing groups in effect.

[[cls-16-10.5]]
=== Backward compatibility

Different versions of data products may be simultaneously active; the
Interoperability Catalogue design allows for backward-compatible updates
if and when the Interoperability Catalogue has to be updated, within the
same major Edition. <<fig-16-9>> below shows an example of how the
Interoperability Catalogue may evolve with change over time.

[[fig-16-9]]
.Example life cycle of Interoperability Catalogue
image::img199.png[]

[[cls-16-10.6]]
=== Interoperability Catalogue product

Each Interoperability Catalogue product should by itself be considered a
whole unit. New versions -- either clarification, correction, or New
Edition -- should be updated by replacement with a newer version. The
update process should be specified in detail when defining an
Interoperability Specification. The following clauses give some principles
to consider for the specific update process.

[[cls-16-10.6.1]]
==== Updating the Interoperability Catalogue

It is recommended that new versions of the Interoperability Catalogues be
distributed using an Exchange Set structure, see Part 17.

Interoperability Catalogues may remain active after a new version has been
issued. Systems receiving new versions within the same major edition
should retain all versions. Store these in separate folders to avoid any
issues, such as when the same support files have been reused between
versions.

Due to issues with broken backwards compatibility, all previous versions
of the Interoperability Catalogue should be cancelled when a New Edition
is issued.

[[cls-16-10.6.2]]
==== Cancelling a version of the Interoperability Catalogue

In order to cancel a version of the Interoperability Catalogue it is
recommended that the methodology used for exchange set as defined in Part
17 metadata is utilized.

[[cls-16-10.7]]
=== Support files

Support files to an Interoperability Catalogue are generally the hybrid
Feature Catalogues and hybrid Portrayal Catalogues. Methods for managing
these are described below.

[[cls-16-10.7.1]]
==== Updating the Interoperability Catalogue support files

It is recommended that support files are updated using the methodology
used for exchange set as defined in Part 17 metadata is utilized.

Support files should be stored in a separate folder within the exchange
set.

[[cls-16-10.7.1.1]]
===== New Edition of the support files

New Editions of the support files introduce significant changes. New
Editions enable new concepts, such as the ability to support new
functions, or the introduction of new constructs. New Editions are likely
to have a significant impact on either existing users or future users of
an Interoperability Catalogue Specification.

[example]
A new product is added to Interoperability Catalogue, and all support
files should be updated to support the new product. This would require a
New Edition of the support files.

[[cls-16-10.7.1.2]]
===== Revisions of the support files

Revisions are defined as substantive semantic changes to the support
files. Typically, revisions will change the support file to correct
factual errors; introduce necessary changes that have become evident as a
result of practical experience or changing circumstances. A revision must
not be classified as a clarification. Revisions could have an impact on
either existing users or future users of an Interoperability Catalogue
Specification. All cumulative clarifications must be included with the
release of approved revisions.

Changes in a revision are minor and ensure backward compatibility with the
previous versions within the same Edition. Newer revisions, for example,
introduce new feature or attribute combinations. Within the same Edition,
a support file created for an Interoperability Catalogue of one version
could always be processed with a later revision.

[example]
Adding a new hybrid feature will require a revision increment to the
support file.

[[cls-16-10.7.1.3]]
===== Clarifications to the support files

Clarifications are non-substantive changes to the support file. Typically,
clarifications: remove ambiguity; correct grammatical and spelling errors;
amend or update cross references; insert improved graphics in spelling,
punctuation and grammar. A clarification must not cause any substantive
semantic change to an Interoperability Catalogue Specification.

Changes in a clarification are minor and ensure backward compatibility
with the previous versions within the same Edition. Within the same
Edition, a support file created for an Interoperability Catalogue of one
version could always be processed with a later clarification (or revision)
of an Interoperability Catalogue.

[example]
Correcting a spelling error in a definition will require a clarification
increment to the support file.
