[[app-16-C]]
[appendix,obligation=informative]
== User Interaction Constraints and Expectations

[[cls-16-C-1]]
=== Introduction

S-100 based products are developed for a variety of uses but generally
define only the product itself and its use, not how it will be used in in
combination with other S-100-based data products or sensor information. It
is anticipated that most S-100-based systems, like ECDIS and other ship
and shore-based systems, will use several different products
simultaneously, each providing one or more information layers. Other data
layers such as real-time sensor information from sources like radar and
AIS are also expected to be present. The smooth interoperation and
harmonized user-friendly graphical presentations of these various products
is necessary for safety and efficiency. This annex gives some guidance to
principles that should be considered when developing smooth interoperation
and harmonized graphical presentation of S-100 data products

[[cls-16-C-2]]
=== Structured interoperation

IMO has issued recommendations and guidelines on how to present navigation
related information. Of particular significance are the documents noted
below.

MSC.191(79), Recommendation on Performance Standards for the Presentation
of Navigation-Related Information on Shipborne Navigational Displays,
specify the presentation of navigational information on the bridge of a
ship, including the consistent use of navigational terms, abbreviations,
colours and symbols, as well as other presentation characteristics. It
also addresses the presentation of navigation information related to
specific navigational tasks by recognizing the use of user selected
presentations in addition to presentations required by the individual
performance standards adopted by the Organization.

MSC.1/Circ.1512, Guideline on Software Quality Assurance and Human-Centred
Design for E-Navigation, gives guidance in achieving trustworthy software
and usability in the development of complex systems requires a disciplined
and structured approach. The guideline encourages particular focus on
Software Quality Assurance (SQA) and Human-Centred Design (HCD) that
includes Usability Testing (UT). Systems so designed, developed and
managed throughout their life cycle deliver improved user performance,
being stable and resilient, and, most importantly, support users in low
and high workload environments, such as during challenging navigation and
environmental conditions when users are most vulnerable to making mistakes
and when error management and recovery is essential. Other important
benefits include limiting the amount of operator familiarization training
that is needed and the time and resources required for system maintenance
and support.

MSC.1/Circ.1609, Guidelines for the Standardization of User Interface
Design for Navigation Equipment, apply to Integrated Navigation Systems
(INS), Electronic Chart Display and Information Systems (ECDIS) and radar
equipment. The guidelines may also be useful to other electronic
navigation equipment, and navigation sensors to improve standardization
and usability. The aim of the Guidelines is to promote standardization of
user interfaces to help meet user needs.

IMO SN.1/Circ.243/Rev.2, Guidelines for the Presentation of
Navigational-Related Symbols, Terms and Abbreviations, stems from a
compelling user need for greater standardization to enhance usability
across navigation equipment and systems. Significant variation between
systems and equipment produced by different manufacturers has led to
inconsistency in the way essential information is presented, understood
and used to perform key navigation safety functions. Improved
standardization of navigation systems will provide users with more timely
access to essential information and functions that support safe navigation.

[[cls-16-C-3]]
=== Interoperation requirements for Product Specifications

Responsible parties for Product Specifications that are included in an
Interoperability Catalogue should consider the impact on this
Interoperability Catalogue and associated Product Specifications
throughout the lifecycle of the Product Specification. The general
principles of Software Quality Assurance (SQA) as found in section 4 of
the Annex to <<imo>> should be applied.

[[fig-16-C-1]]
.Generic life cycle (from MSC.1/Circ.1512)
image::img218.png[width=80%]

<<fig-16-C-1>> shows a typical generic life cycle with the stages
recommended as a minimum for the management of the development of Product
Specifications that are used with the Interoperability Catalogue:

* Analysis of operational system feedback;
* Stage 1: Concept development;
* Stage 2: Planning and analysis;
* Stage 3: Design;
* Stage 4: Integration and testing;
* Stage 5: Operation; and
* Disposal.

[[cls-16-C-4]]
=== Customization -- user level

S-100 compatible systems that support the IHO Interoperability Catalogue
may include functionality that allow end users (including ship owners,
operators, and shipboard officers) to add new predefined combinations
according with their needs. These added combinations must not interfere or
degrade the official IHO Interoperability Catalogue functions.

[[cls-16-C-5]]
=== Support Human-Centred Design

As noted in MSC.1/Circ.1512, HCD helps to ensure that human
factors-related knowledge and techniques in system design and development
processes are addressed, thus ensuring that user needs and safety are met.
Implementers of this Specification should perform Usability Testing (UT)
and follow the principles stated in MSC.1/Circ.1512 when designing the
user interface for interoperability in ECDIS, including the following HCD
activities that are carried out to inform development throughout the life
cycle:

* Pre-activity: Conduct Early Human Element Analysis (EHEA);
* Activity 1: Understand and specify the context of use;
* Activity 2: Identify the user requirements;
* Activity 3: Produce and/or develop design solutions to meet user
requirements;
* Activity 4: Evaluate the design against usability criteria; and
* Activity 5: Maintain operational usability.

Note that fundamental to HCD is the collection of user feedback through
Usability Testing.

[[fig-16-C-2]]
.Overview of HCD for e-navigation systems (from MSC.1/Circ.1512)
image::img219.png[]

The details of recommended activities at each stage are found in section 6
of the Annex to <<imo>>.

[[cls-16-C-5.1]]
==== Human-Centred Design and user interface

MSC.1/Circ.1609, Guidelines for the Standardization of User Interface
Design for Navigation Equipment notes in section 15 principles utilized in
the formation of the guidelines. These and the resulting appendixes may be
of benefit for any system implementing support for an Interoperability
Catalogue.

[[cls-16-C-5.2]]
==== Human-Centred Design and text

MSC.191(79) as amended, notes in section 5.2.3 that use of text should be
presented using simple unambiguous language that is easy to understand.
Navigation terms and abbreviations should be presented using the
nomenclature defined in IMO SN.1/Circ.243/Rev.2 and MSC.1/Circ.1609 and
encouraged their use for all shipborne navigational systems and equipment.
Shore based equipment that interact with shipborne system may also benefit
from guidance in these guidelines.

[[cls-16-C-6]]
=== User control over loaded set

Users of systems with interoperability capabilities may have functionality
to load additional products, or turn off one or more of the data products
in a predefined combination.

Data from such additional products which are not mentioned in an
Interoperability Catalogue should be treated by the system according to
the priorities and viewing groups encoded in the product's own Portrayal
Catalogue (for example interleaved with layers from products controlled by
the Interoperability Catalogue according to their relative rendering
orders and drawing priorities).

When a user turns off a data product, the portrayal should treat it as if
the relevant datasets are not available on the system at all. For example,
interoperability rules that are made inapplicable due to one of the data
products in their conditions being turned off are unavailable.

[[cls-16-C-7]]
=== User control over interoperation level

The system should allow the user to change the interoperation level (see
<<cls-16-8>>) and/or pick a predefined combination by means of simple
operations. Any options offered to the user must be valid in context; for
example, if the Interoperability Catalogue supports more than one
interoperability level, the user interface should offer the user a choice
of predefined combinations at an interoperability level. The listed
combinations should be only those defined at that level in the
Interoperability Catalogue.

The system should minimise demands for user interaction when changing
interoperability level or predefined combinations, subject to constraints
imposed by the platform and interface. Some implications of this guidance
are:

. When the interoperability level alone is changed and the
Interoperability Catalogue contains a predefined combination of the new
level that lists the currently displayed product set, the system should
apply the rules of the new level to the product set immediately.
Alternative predefined combinations for the level may be offered in an
unobtrusive way.
+
--
[example]
Product A and Product B data are both on-screen when Level 1 (no
suppression) is changed to Level 2 (suppression supported), and the
catalogue includes a "Level 2 Product B + Product A" predefined
combination. Interleaving of Product A and Product B features (Level 1)
immediately changes to suppression of Product A navigation aids by Product
B navigation aid features (Level 2).

Optionally, an indication may be provided to inform the user of the active
predefined combinations defined at the new level in the Interoperability
Catalogue.
--
. When the predefined combination alone is changed and the
Interoperability Catalogue contains the new predefined combination at the
current level, the system should apply the rules of the current level to
the new predefined combination.
+
--
[example]
The system is in Level 2 (suppression supported) and the Product B +
Product A predefined combination is changed to Product B + Product A +
Product C. The system suppresses Product A Restricted Area features of
type "nature reserve" in favour of Marine Protected Areas from Product C.
--
. When the Interoperability Catalogue does not contain a predefined
combination at a newly selected level, the user interface should provide
an indication of this to the user (though not necessarily by disabling the
choice or blocking the transition). Strategies for dealing with this
situation are left to interface designers. For example, systems may offer
to use the closest fit in an Interoperability Catalogue with any residual
on-screen products as ordinary overlays.

[[cls-16-C-8]]
=== Priority overrides for user-specified settings

Where user action amends a setting, which then conflicts with a system
setting, the user setting should override the system setting. The system
may give indication of this override.

[example]
Feature rendering order set by a user should override settings in an
Interoperability Catalogue or Portrayal Catalogue.
