[[cls-16a-4]]
== Introduction

In any system where several types of data products and sensor inputs will be
used on a common screen, there is a need to harmonise their portrayal in the
user interface. Harmonisation is needed to ensure users are not misled by,
for example, contradictory symbology, text or colours. Harmonisation also is
also needed reduce the risk of the screen becoming overloaded with
information. Portrayal harmonisation is also needed to reduce the user
burden in terms of training requirements and the quantity of visual
variables which must be memorised and considered in assessing information
displayed on screens, and to give improved predictability for system
implementors. The IMO has developed guidance for presentation of
e-Navigational related information and this guidance should be leveraged for
any portrayal harmonisation framework.

This Part contains portrayal harmonisation that describes how S-100-based
products should be used and displayed simultaneously. It is an overarching
statement of principles which applies generally to all S-100-based Product
Specifications. Since this does not depend on particular Product
Specifications, flexibility is possible in the approach to designing and
developing portrayal, and user interfaces, which should make it unnecessary
to amend all involved Product Specifications should any additional Product
Specifications be identified, or any portrayal rules need amendment.

One important aspect of this guidance is defining the classes of user system
to which any guidance applies, as there are a great variety of potential
users of S-100-based products. For purposes of portrayal harmonisation, this
document divides applications and systems into the following broad
categories (in practice often a matter of configuration and task rather than
equipment or software):

* ECDIS, INS, and similar navigation display systems and applications -
primarily used for voyage planning and monitoring, and collision avoidance,
with ENC as primary geographical data; covered by SOLAS and require type
approval for meeting carriage requirements;
* Electronic Charting Systems (ECS) and similar systems and applications
(for example, Portable Pilot Units (PPU)) - primarily used for route
monitoring and voyage planning, with ENC or equivalents as the primary data;
type approval not required;
* Other types of S-100 based user systems and applications, including shore
systems.

Most S-100 based Product Specifications to date have been developed for
ECDIS. ECDIS is a long-established and well documented concept, and since
other users of S-100-based products are likely to know how the ECDIS concept
relates to their systems, ECDIS is therefore the best-known user system upon
which to model the portrayal harmonisation guidance.

Given the importance of ECDIS and other navigation displays (for route
monitoring or voyage planning) to marine transport, this Part defines
principles focused on such navigation displays as well as more general
principles intended for other application domains.

[[cls-16a-4.1]]
=== Organisations and standards

Several organisations are involved in developing standards and guidelines
for portrayal, alerts and indications, and other user interface elements.
<<fig-16a-1>> below depicts the main organisations which contribute to the
development of user interface standards and other specifications, and the
main influences between different kinds of standards/specifications. The
current set of standards and specifications relevant to portrayal and the
user experience can be characterised as follows:

* Presentation, performance, and user experience standards for ECDIS and INS
are generally developed under IMO control, and include standards and
guidelines for display and user interaction, including alerts. Specification
of navigation-related symbols, including chart symbols, have generally been
assigned to IHO as the subject matter experts.
* The framework for data content and display is defined in IHO standards,
primarily in the form of the S-100 standard, supplemented by the IHO
Geospatial Information (GI) registry as a repository of data object
concepts, type definitions, and symbology. S-100 also provides an abstract
specification for visual interoperability for displaying multiple products
on the same screen; the only concrete specification for interoperability at
the time of writing is <<S98>>, which covers EDCIS interoperability.
* Specifications for individual data products are produced by several
organisations depending on the specific domain. Standards covering
geographic data and marine services are developed by IHO, weather and
ice-related Product Specifications is generally under WMO responsibility,
navigational warnings are an IHO/IMO joint effort by the WWNWS
sub-committee, specifications for Inland ENCs are produced by the Inland ENC
Harmonisation Group (IEHG), and IEC manages a standard for route
exchange{blank}footnote:[Other organisations are also developing S-100-based
standards for information exchange, of varying relevance to portrayal and
user interaction, shipboard or onshore. The list of Product Specifications
in <<fig-16a-1>> is representative, not comprehensive.].
* A Product Specification should include the symbols and portrayal rules for
the data product, however where this is not included, the system can specify
the portrayal rules for the resulting products. System specified portrayal
rules should also follow the portrayal harmonisation guidance.
* Standards for testing operation and performance of equipment and systems
are developed under IEC control.

The various categories of standards and specifications are generally
interrelated and often co-dependent. IMO navigation and safety standards
refer to IHO symbology for representing geographic features, IHO symbology
is defined taking into account user interface guidelines in IMO standards,
and the IEC operational, performance, and testing standards influence and
are influenced by both IMO and IHO documents. Individual Product
Specifications are based on the S-100 framework and are referenced by
testing guidelines. Product Specifications are based on the S-100 framework
and the features and attributes in their data models, as well as the symbols
and colours they specify for portrayal of the data, should all be in
registered in the IHO GI Registry. These interrelationships are depicted in
<<fig-16a-1>>.

*Developers must conform to the mandatory requirements of the particular
standards which apply to an application or system. In case of a conflict
between this Part and a mandatory requirement in an applicable cited
standard, the requirement in the standard supersedes the guidance in this
Part.*

Summaries of the various standards and specifications are provided in
<<app-16a-A>>.

[[fig-16a-1]]
.Overview of organisations, specifications, and user interface standards
image::img220.png[]

[[cls-16a-4.2]]
=== Application systems concepts and limitations

This clause describes the concept and limitations of the main types of
application systems covered by this Part. ECDIS and INS are covered in <<S98>>
and the focus of this clause is on considerations that affect content and
behaviour of other systems.

[[cls-16a-4.2.1]]
==== Electronic Chart Systems (ECS)

ECS is a common denominator for all systems that portray electronic charts.
<<RTCM10900>> defines Electronic Chart System as an electronic navigation
system which complies with the requirements it sets or in <<IEC62376>>. ECS
systems may meet the ECDIS requirements, have additional functionality or be
a simple tablet or phone with a GNSS function and capabilty to show
electronic charts. <<RTCM10900>> gives a grading of ECS systems from Class A
through D; where Class A is equal to an ECDIS backup and Class D is any
device "intended to plot the position of ships that do not operate offshore.
They are not required to have all of the functionality of a Class C ECS.
They are required to display electronic chart information and plot a ship's
position, but are not required to display eMSI, or to monitor the ship's
position or to provide voyage planning or voyage monitoring functionality".

The graphical appearance of charted areas on the screen is usually similar
to that of an ECDIS, with elements (for example, borders or off-graphic
indicators) added. These systems will generally also have additional data
products loaded, for example official products containing Marine Protected
Areas or Marine Radio Services, or unofficial products such as points of
interest (POI) to leisure craft users.

ECS may provide functionality not available on ECDIS and while ECS may not
be as constrained as ECDIS, such systems, if intended for shipboard use (for
example, Portable Pilot Units (PPU)), should, as far as practicable, follow
the same principles for symbology and colours. Their text display elements,
display organisations, pick reports, and user interfaces may be more
elaborate than ECDIS (so as to allow users more access to information or
more detailed information), but should have compatible structure and
functionality (for example, similar prominence for significant features,
user interface labels and menu items should have the same meanings).

This principle is based on reducing, as far as possible, the cognitive
switching penalty{blank}footnote:[See, for example, "Multitasking: Switching
costs", American Psychological Association
<https://www.apa.org/research/action/multitask>.] when switching from
planning to monitoring tasks on shipboard. The constraints in this clause
are therefore less applicable to systems not intended for shipboard use
(though _actual_ use versus _intended_ use must be considered).

[[cls-16a-4.2.2]]
==== Other systems

Portrayal harmonisation is also beneficial in other systems, such as those
that cover shore-side and specialised systems not intended for onboard route
monitoring or ship movement monitoring or control, or other tasks allocated
to an ECDIS, INS, or ECS. An example of such shore side systems is Vessel
Traffic Management Information System (VTMIS). VTMIS can be regarded as an
extension of a Vessel Traffic Service (VTS), since its main purpose is an
Integrated Maritime Surveillance system. VTMIS incorporates other resources
to allow associated services and other stakeholders to directly share VTS
data or access to certain subsystems in order to increase the effectiveness
of port or maritime activity operations as a whole, but may not relate to
the purpose of the VTS itself.

VTMIS are generally specified individually to the specific VTS but may be
governed by national or regional regulations. For example, Directive
2002/59/EC of the European Parliament governs VTS inspections of European
Maritime Safety Authority (EMSA) member countries. IALA provides guidance
about portrayal of data and information in shore-side systems, including
VTMIS (for example, <<G1105>>).

Generally, ENC charts form the base layer in a VTMIS and other data sources
form layers of additional information or enhanced information to aid the
VTMIS operator in monitoring and decision making. Examples of additional
layers included radar and AIS for target tracking, AIS-ASM (AIS Application
Specific Messages) for sensor information such as met-hydro information, air
gaps and special zones such as irregular speed zones. Moreover, radio
services may form an integral layer for service assistance. Other examples
include MSI such as navigational warnings and meteorological warnings.
Oceanographic information such as surface currents and water level may also
be important layers.
