[[cls-18-3]]
== General Description

Under S-100 a number of XML Schemas are defined. These are used in variety of
contexts within the framework and by data producers and implementers to define
XML content. This part introduces the concept of "language packs" to enable
multi-lingual support specific to XML content.

For specific XML "source" content, a language pack is a published XML dataset
which provides translations of selected elements of the source content. A
language pack is, itself, XML content with a schema defined under S-100,
described in <<cls-18-6>>.

This mechanism enables transformation of selected elements of the source
content from one language (the "source language") to another (the "target
language").

[[fig-18-1]]
.Language pack support process
image::img236.png[]

Multiple language packs may also be constructed to define multi-lingual
translations of (potentially different) content from the Source XML. For
example:

[[fig-18-2]]
.Example multi-lingual support
image::img237.png[]

Note that the language pack only provides a list of translations for specific
identified elements within the source content. A version of the source content
with all the relevant elements translated is not necessarily produced. The
language pack and the source content are distributed and used together by
implementing systems to provide multi-lingual support to an end user

For example, in <<fig-18-3>> below an XML Feature Catalogue and three language
packs, together with a dataset are delivered in an Exchange Set to an
implementing system. The dataset provides the data content and the Feature
Catalogue and its language packs provides multi-lingual support for the user
interface elements (for example, legends and textual descriptions of features).

[[fig-18-3]]
.Multi-lingual support -- Exchange Set to implementing system
image::img238.png[]
