== General concepts

=== Register

As described in Part 2, a Register is simply a managed list. It is easier to
maintain than a fixed document, because new items can be added as needed to the
Register, and existing items in the Register can be clarified, superseded or
retired. Each Register item has one or more dates associated with it that indicate
when changes in its status occurred. This means that a Product Specification,
defined at a given date, may reference an item in the Register at that specific
point in time.

=== Relationship to the ISO Register and Feature Concept Dictionary Models

The realization of ISO 19126 and ISO 19135 types in the IHO GI Registry is shown in
<<fig-2a-1>> below. This Figure depicts the ISO types (elements with grey
backgrounds); the implemented S-100 Registry model classes (elements with tan
backgrounds); and two of the Registers comprising the IHO GI Registry (elements
with white backgrounds). The Registers themselves are implemented within different
sections of the IHO GI Registry web site, each accessible through a site navigation
menu.

The ISO type "Feature Concept Dictionary", which contains definitions of feature
and attribute types, is implemented as the "Data Dictionary Register" in the IHO GI
Registry (S100_DataDictionaryRegister in <<fig-2a-1>>). The Data Dictionary
Register contains definitions of features, information types, attributes (both
simple and complex), and enumerated values for enumeration and S100_Codelist
attributes (see S-100 Part 1, clauses 1-4.7 and 1-4.8). The Data Dictionary
Register is further described in <<cls-2a-3.4;and!cls-2a-4.1.2>>.

The IHO GI Registry also implements a "Concept Register" (S100_ConceptRegister in
<<fig-2a-1>>), which can be understood as a kind of glossary of terms with
definitions and sources. Individual entries in the Concept Register are represented
by the class S100_Concept. The Concept Register is separate from the Data
Dictionary Register. However, entries in the Data Dictionary Register are derived
from entries in the Concept Register. The Concept Register is further described in
<<cls-2a-3.3;and!cls-2a-4.1.1>>.

Registers for associations and roles are not currently implemented within the IHO
GI Registry and the corresponding ISO types are therefore not included in
<<fig-2a-1>>. Also, the IHO GI Registry includes additional Registers (for Portrayal,
Producer Codes, Product Specifications, and Metadata) which are not shown in
<<fig-2a-1>>.

[[fig-2a-1]]
.Relationships of the S-100 Registry Classes to ISO 19126/ISO 19135 Model
image::img19.png[]

[[cls-2a-3.3]]
=== Concept Register

A Concept Register specifies unique, independent sets of definitions of concepts
that may be used to describe geographic, hydrographic, and metadata information.
These concepts as registered in a Concept Register may then be used within a Data
Dictionary or Meta Data Register to develop a Feature Catalogue. Unlike a Data
Dictionary Register, a Concept Register does not make associations; or define type
or bindings of concepts to other concepts. From this perspective, registered items
within the Concept Register are essentially "stateless", which allows for
flexibility of the use of the concepts for suitable data modelling to satisfy the
requirements of Product Specifications.

Such Registers of geospatial information may serve as sources of reference for
similar Registers established by other geographic information communities as part
of a system of cross-referencing.

[[cls-2a-3.4]]
=== Data Dictionary Register

A Data Dictionary Register specifies independent sets of definitions of features,
attributes, enumerated values, and information types that may be used to describe
geographic, hydrographic, and metadata information. A Data Dictionary Register may
be used to assign an item defined in a Concept Register a type (for example
feature, attribute and enumerate value); and define recommended associations and
attribute/feature bindings to facilitate the development of Feature Catalogues.
Items in a Concept Register can only be registered once against each type in a Data
Dictionary Register in order to support interoperability.

Such Data Dictionaries of geospatial information may serve as sources of reference
for similar Data Dictionaries or Registers established by other geographic
information communities as part of a system of cross-referencing.

=== Feature Catalogue

A Feature Catalogue is a document that describes the content of a data product. It
uses item types, for example features and attributes, from one or more Data
Dictionaries and binds them together. In addition constraints, units of measurement
and format description of attributes can be specified. Feature Catalogues are
described in detail in S-100 Part 5.
