[[cls-15-4]]
== Participants in the Protection Scheme

There are several types of users of the Scheme; these are as follows:

* The Scheme Administrator (SA), of which there is only one;
* The Data Server (DS), of which there can be many;
* The Data Client (DC), of which there are many;
* The Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) of which there are many;
* Domain Coordinators, of which there may be many.

A more detailed explanation of these terms is given below. Details of the roles
for each of the scheme participants are managed by the IHO acting as the Scheme
Administrator.

[[cls-15-4.1]]
=== Scheme Administrator

The Scheme Administrator (SA) is solely responsible for maintaining and
coordinating the Protection Scheme. The SA role is operated by The International
Hydrographic Organization (IHO) on behalf of the IHO Member States and other
organizations participating in the Protection Scheme. These organizations can have
a coordinating role for a maritime product domain; for example IMO and IALA. The
IHO as the SA will establish procedures with product domain operators using the
Protection Scheme to protect their products. These procedures will enable these
domain coordinators to digitally sign the digital certificates used by their
member organizations to participate in the Protection Scheme.

The SA is responsible for controlling membership of the Scheme and ensuring that
all participants operate according to defined procedures. The SA maintains the top
level digital root certificate used to operate the Protection Scheme and which
forms the root identity in the authentication chain.

The SA is responsible for distributing the manufacturer ID (M_ID) and manufacturer
key (M_KEY) directly to all registered Data Servers participating in the
Protection Scheme.

The SA is also the custodian of all documentation relating to the implementation
of this part of S-100. All operational procedures are defined and managed by the
SA.

[[cls-15-4.2]]
=== Data Servers

Data Servers (DS) are responsible for the encryption and/or digital signing of the
datasets in compliance with the procedures and processes defined in this Part.
Data Servers may also issue Licenses (data permits) so that Data Clients, with
valid user permits, can decrypt the product data.

Data Servers will use the M_KEY and M_ID information, as supplied by the SA, to
issue encrypted product keys to each specific installation. Even though the keys
used to encrypt each dataset are the same for individual data clients, they will
be encrypted using the HW_ID and therefore cannot be transferred between other
system installations from the same manufacturer.

The Scheme does not impede agents or distributors from providing data services to
their customers. Agreements and structures to achieve this are outside the scope
of this document. This document contains only the technical specifications to
produce protected datasets compliant with this standard.

Hydrographic Offices, data producers, Value Added Resellers and RENC Organizations
are examples of Data Servers.

[[cls-15-4.3]]
=== Data Clients

Data Clients (DC) are the end users of datasets and will receive protected
information from the Data Servers to access and use the datasets and services. The
Data Client's software application (OEM System) is responsible for authenticating
the digital signatures applied to the product files and decrypting the dataset
information in compliance with the procedures defined in the Scheme.

Navigators with ECDIS/ECS systems are examples of Data Clients.

[[cls-15-4.4]]
=== Original Equipment Manufacturers

Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) subscribing to the S-100 Data Protection
Scheme must build a software application according to the specifications set out
in this document and self-verify and validate it according to the terms mandated
by the SA. This Part will establish test data for the verification and validation
of OEM applications for various S-100 based Product Specifications when products
become available. The SA will provide successful OEM applicants with their own
unique manufacturer key and identification (M_KEY and M_ID).

The manufacturer must provide a secure mechanism within their software systems for
uniquely identifying each end user installation. The Scheme requires each
installation to have a hardware identifier (HW_ID) unless a Data Server has
consented to duplication.

The software application will be able to decrypt the product keys in the data
permits using the HW_ID stored in either the hard lock or soft lock devices
attached to or programmed within the application to subsequently decrypt and
uncompress the dataset files. Product integrity can be verified by authenticating
the digital signature provided with the dataset files.

[[cls-15-4.5]]
=== Domain Coordinator

Domain Coordinators are nominated, trusted bodies of the SA, able to produce
certificates and provide intermediate authentication of Data Servers within their
domain. Domain Coordinators are appointed by the SA and have delegated authority
to sign Data Server certificates within their own domain. When Data Clients
authenticate the identity of digital signatures created by Data Servers the
certificates form a "chain" to the SA's root level identity. If a Data Server is
certified by a Domain Coordinator, then the Data Client should also verify their
identity against the SA root providing an authentication chain from the dataset to
the SA.

[[cls-15-4.6]]
=== Participant Relationships

The Scheme Administrator (SA), of which there can only be one, authenticates the
identity of the other participants within the scheme. All Data Servers, Domain
Coordinators and System Manufacturers (OEMs) must apply to the SA to become
participants in the Scheme and, on acceptance, are supplied with proprietary
information unique to them. Data Clients are customers of Data Servers and OEMs,
where Data Servers supply data services and OEMs the equipment to decrypt and
display these services.

The SA will sign the public key of Data Servers to create their digital
certificate to be used in the operation of the Protection Scheme. It is also
possible for Domain Coordinators to sign the public key of their member
organizations to create their digital certificates. The Domain Coordinators will
inform the SA of each Data Server's identity and contact details and sign their
certificates. The SA and Domain Coordinators will distribute M_ID and M_KEY
information directly to all Data Servers participating in the Protection Scheme
when they join the scheme and as more Data Clients are added.

[[fig-15-1]]
.Relationship between Protection Scheme participants
image::img183.png[]

Since the Protection Scheme does not rely on Data Clients always having an
internet connection to authenticate certificates or for certificate path
validation, sufficient information shall be included in the Exchange Set Metadata
to perform these functions. In all cases the SA certificate is installed on end
user systems separately and not distributed in the exchange set metadata to
provide independent verification of the SA certificate.
