[[cls-14-3]]
== Introduction

Online data exchange between applications/devices will follow different
communication patterns to support the variety of maritime operational
needs.

Multiple clients can interact with a service to interchange data which is
modelled with S-100. It can be distinguished between unidirectional
message streams and interactive information exchange.

Context for a communication can be given by using the concept of session
oriented communication.&nbsp;Therefore, the communication between
distinguished communication partners can be assigned to a logical entity --
a session. This allows to store metadata for the interactions assigned to
the session.

The means of communication for the use of a service should be defined in a
communication stack. Specifying a communication stack will ensure that
communication for the service is harmonized and will make implementation
easier.

[[cls-14-3.1]]
=== Communication stack

The communication is organized by a stack as defined by the ISO-OSI
Reference Model and cover at the A-profile for example:

* Session protocols (for example WSDL, SOAP, REST, SoS) to define message
types;
* Encoding and compression (for example GML, XML, ISO8211, HDF, ....) to
serialize data;
* Communication protocol (for example HTTP) with encryption (for example
HTTPS) to define interaction between gateways;
* Transportation Layer (for example TCP/IP) with encryption (for example
SSL) to define transportation node between gateways.

[[fig-14-2]]
.Communication Stack
image::img173.png[]

This Part only addresses the concepts in the application and the
presentation layer. The lower layers covering the T-Profile are out of
scope of S-100. This could be Internet Protocol or VDES based for example.
