[[cls-8-13]]
== Feature Oriented Image

All gridded datasets are feature oriented, in that a coverage is a subtype of a
feature. That is an entire gridded dataset can be considered to be a single feature.
A feature structure can be applied to gridded data in two different ways. First, a
discrete coverage can carry a feature code as an attribute. For example, a coverage
corresponding to the postal code system will have discrete values for each postal
code, yet still cover the country completely. The only difference in the Application
Schema is a relationship between the discrete coverage and the feature. This is shown
in <<fig-8-28>>.

[[fig-8-28]]
.Feature oriented discrete coverage
image::img83.png[]

The second method of establishing a feature structure is to develop a composite
dataset that contains many separate but adjoining coverages. The coverages may be
continuous or discrete. This is very much like the way a "vector" data set is
composed where each feature has its own geometry and attributes. In fact vector data
may be mixed with coverage data in the same dataset. The Application Schema simply
allows multiple instances of features.

Geometric elements such as grids may be shared between multiple features, and
features may be related by composition or other relationships as allowed in the
general feature model of <<ISO19109>>. A complex feature may include both a
continuous grid coverage and vector data such as a polygonal boundary. A feature
oriented dataset may contain both a continuous coverage of the ocean as collected by
sonar, and point and line features corresponding to navigational aids. Topological
primitives may relate all of the features. This allows for some interesting and
useful structures.

A Raster Nautical Chart may include additional vector data describing the
navigational aids, hazards and danger zones, which is not "visible" in that it is not
portrayed, but which is active in the use of the Raster Nautical Chart, so a ship can
determine whether it is within a danger zone, or perform some other ECDIS-like
functions.

See <<app-8-E>> for additional information about Feature Oriented Gridded Data.
