[[app-8-E]]
[appendix,obligation=informative]
== Feature Oriented Images

The Spatial Object in the S-100 model and in the ISO model can represent either
Vector data or Imagery, Gridded or Coverage data. Both make reference to an
externally defined Spatial Referencing System. Also both are feature oriented.

Most people do not think of Imagery, Gridded or Coverage data as being feature
oriented. At the minimum an image or a set of gridded measurements or a TIN coverage
can be considered as a single feature, so in essence such data is feature oriented.
But this is the minimum case. It is possible to include in an imagery, gridded or
coverage dataset a data structure that could group pixels to identify features. For
example an attribute could be included with each pixel that carried a feature ID
number. This would allow one to identify certain features as being a particular
feature type. In an image dataset corresponding to a scanned paper chart, one could
mark sets of pixels as representing various hydrographic features. There are other
more efficient methods of carrying such feature ID attribute data for an image than
adding bits to each pixel. There is no obligation to build such sophisticated feature
oriented imagery datasets, but both S-100 and the ISO standards allow them to be
built if needed. This can be very important for the fusion of bathymetric sensor data
represented as an image together with vector chart data.

This appendix discusses the utility of feature oriented images and gives examples.
The structures to support feature oriented images are very simple and are part of the
application. It is not obvious that a single reference within the data model allows
for an entire capability, so this informative appendix illustrates how that
capability can be implemented and used.

All gridded datasets are feature oriented, in that a coverage is a subtype of a
feature. That is, an entire gridded dataset can be considered to be a single feature.
A feature structure can be applied to gridded data in two different ways. First, a
discrete coverage can carry a feature code as an attribute. For example, a coverage
corresponding to the postal code system will have discrete values for each postal
code, yet still cover the country completely. The only difference in the Application
Schema is a relationship between the discrete coverage and the feature. This is shown
in <<fig-8-E-1>>.

[[fig-8-E-1]]
.Feature oriented discrete coverage
image::img84.png[]

The model shown in <<fig-8-E-2>> below illustrates the collocation of two grids,
supported by one grid value matrix to achieve the assignment of feature ID to
specific cells. The discrete coverage allows for the assignment of feature codes to
Grid Value Matrix entities and the continuous coverage allows one to handle the image.

[[fig-8-E-2]]
.Assigning feature codes to pixels in an image.
image::img85.png[]

The second method of establishing a feature structure is to develop a composite
dataset that contains many separate but adjoining coverages. The coverages may be
continuous or discrete. This is very much like the way a "vector" dataset is composed
where each feature has its own geometry and attributes. In fact vector data may be
mixed with coverage data in the same dataset. The Application Schema simply allows
multiple instances of features.

Geometric elements such as grids may be shared between multiple features, and
features may be related by composition or other relationships as allowed in the
general feature model of <<ISO19109>>. A complex feature may include both a
continuous grid coverage and vector data such as a polygonal boundary. A feature
oriented dataset may contain both a continuous coverage of the ocean as collected by
sonar, and point and line features corresponding to navigational aids. Topological
primitives may relate all of the features. This allows for some interesting and
useful structures. For example, a scanned paper map represented as a gridded dataset
may include additional vector data describing the roads and other features on the
scanned map, which is not "visible" in that it is not portrayed, but which is active
in that a user might query the name of a feature or traverse along a road on what
would appear to be a gridded data set.
